README.md, before:

# Cultural Consensus Theory with PyMC Midterm -- Report By Alyssa G. Mendoza

This is an individual project by Alyssa G. Mendoza, for Cogs 107 Midterm Asssignment, due 5/14 @ 12pm. ChatGPT was used overall, for structure, naming, organization, resolving errors, and writing.

To summarize, this project explored a Bayesian Cultural Consensus Theory, or CCT, model with PyMC to assess 20 plant knowledge questions across 10 informants. Informant competence (Dᵢ) was modeled with a Uniform(0.5, 1.0) prior, and consensus answers (Zⱼ) with a Bernoulli(0.5) prior to reflect no initial bias. The likelihood was defined so that the probability of a response depended on whether the true answer was Zⱼ and the informant’s competence Dᵢ, using reshaping to match dimensions.

For posterior sampling, I initially aimed for 2000 draws and 4 chains, but due to seeing a longer predicted runtime of roughly 1hr30min, I experimented and ultimately used 300 draws across 2 chains. This brought the time duration down to about 30 minutes, so runtime constraints were effectively addressed. R-hat values were mostly acceptable, though a few parameters may benefit from more chains. Additionally, based on posterior means, P6 was the most competent (≈ 0.87), and P3 the least (≈ 0.56). The model’s consensus key differed from the majority vote on **[X]** items, very likely because the CCT model weighted informants by competence, offering a more accurate reflection of shared cultural knowledge.

Furthermore, found below is an image of the posterior distributions for each informant’s competence (Dᵢ), with means and 94% HDIs shown for each.

![Posterior D](figures/posterior_D.png)

Commit message:

Final update: comments in cct.py, updated README, and posterior_Z plot

README.md, after:

# Cultural Consensus Theory with PyMC Midterm -- Report By Alyssa G. Mendoza

This is an individual project by Alyssa G. Mendoza, for Cogs 107 Midterm Asssignment, due 5/14 @ 12:05pm. ChatGPT was used overall, for structure, naming, organization, resolving errors, and writing.

Note: The script pauses after showing each plot with `plt.show()`, and to view the final printed results (for example, mismatches, most/least competent informants), please close the figure windows manually.

To summarize, this project explored a Bayesian Cultural Consensus Theory, or CCT, model with PyMC to assess 20 plant knowledge questions across 10 informants. Informant competence (Dᵢ) was modeled with a Uniform(0.5, 1.0) prior, and consensus answers (Zⱼ) with a Bernoulli(0.5) prior to reflect no initial bias. The likelihood was defined so that the probability of a response depended on whether the true answer was Zⱼ and the informant’s competence Dᵢ, using reshaping to match dimensions.

For posterior sampling, I initially aimed for 2000 draws and 4 chains, but due to seeing a longer predicted runtime of roughly 1hr30min, I experimented and ultimately used 300 draws across 2 chains. This brought the time duration down to about 30 minutes, so runtime constraints were effectively addressed. R-hat values were mostly acceptable, though a few parameters may benefit from more chains. Additionally, based on posterior means, P6 was the most competent (≈ 0.87), and P3 the least (≈ 0.56). The model’s consensus key differed from the majority vote on 5 items, very likely because the CCT model weighted informants by competence. This yields a reflection of shared cultural knowledge that is more accurate.

Furthermore, shown below are visualizations of the posterior distributions for both the informant competence (Dᵢ) and consensus answers (Zⱼ), with means and 94% HDIs shown for each.

![Posterior D](figures/posterior_D.png)

![Posterior Z](figures/posterior_Z.png)
